Alright, welcome, Tom! Weird being on the other side of the mic?
Totally is — but I guess it's only fair that I get to be the victim for once.
Perfect! Viewers know you as the voice behind Compass, but they don't really know you. Ready to spill the predestined beans?
Beans incoming — though technically they were shelled at the Big Bang.
I can already tell this is going to be...fun! Okay, let's rewind. Little-kid Tom in Oregon — what shaped the philosophical tornado we see today?
Picture an eight-year-old lining up rocks by quartz content, equally fascinated by erosion and the fact that I couldn't not line them up, if you know what I mean. Mom thought it was cute; I thought it meant gravity had opinions.
There's a rumor you were kicked out of karate class for over-analyzing the katas.
That's right, I got kicked out of karate class for over-analyzing the katas. I asked Sensei if our punches were choices or Newtonian inevitabilities. He suggested I 'inevitably' take up chess instead. So I did — for exactly three weeks, until I realized the pawns had more agency than I did.
That's brutal. Fast-forward to college. You've called those years "cosmically empty but educational." What did that look like?
Lots of instant ramen at ungodly hours, reading Camus between econ lectures, and realizing each messy dorm argument was the only argument that could have happened. My roommate thought I needed sleep. I thought I needed a better universe.
Any particular "aha" moment?
Freshman-year philosophy seminar. Professor asked if we could have chosen differently in the trolley problem. I asked if the trolley could have chosen not to exist, and he just sighed.
Classic. Did the existential weight ever get too heavy?
Totally. There were nights I'd stare at the ceiling fan wondering if even its squeak frequency was predetermined. Spoiler: physics says yes.
Then you got into exercise. How did kettlebells become philosophy tools?
Swinging 24 kg of iron is the perfect metaphor: you set it in motion, physics does the rest, and you just hang on for the arc. My "decision" to work out was nothing more than dopamine meeting cabin fever in a dorm basement gym.
Did it help with the dread?
It converted dread into quadricep soreness, which is easier to explain at parties.
Meditation came next. Be honest — first session?
I drooled on the cushion and called it "non-dual awareness." The app said, "Notice thoughts." I noticed I wanted nachos.
When did the practice click?
The day I realized thoughts appear before I "think" them. Meditation didn't give me control — it exposed that the control panel isn't even plugged in.
You cite neuroscience a lot. Any single study that broke the camel's back?
Libet's readiness-potential experiments were gateway data. Learning that my brain logs the decision milliseconds before consciousness gets the memo — it's like my Gmail auto-replied "Sure, kale smoothie" before I opened the thread.
Some critics say that gap is too small to be philosophically relevant.
Tell that to the bullet train engineer — milliseconds matter.
Was there a definitive "no-free-will" moment?
There was one specific time where I was waiting for a latte. I watched the barista, thought "I could just bail," and felt the neural gears click: nope, staying. The latte was predestined foam.
Did that feel liberating or horrifying?
Honestly? Like removing a tight shoe. Sudden relief, slight awkwardness, and the realization my sock has holes.
Uhm, okay...upsides. How has dropping free will helped day-to-day?
Zero self-loathing when I binge-watch reality TV and infinite patience when someone cuts me off — clearly their neurons misfired on schedule. Life feels like a documentary I get front-row seats to, popcorn included.
Critics say determinism breeds passivity.
Water flows downhill *fast*. Acceptance doesn't equal inaction — it's just action without the ego confetti cannon.
That's good! Rapid-fire. Favorite deterministic movie?
Groundhog Day — same day, no choices, comedic enlightenment.
Biggest myth about determinism?
That it's emotionally cold. I find it warms compassion — everyone's just physics doing its best cosplay of people.
Any regrets?
Impossible by definition, but missing missing that Uber investment stings in a purely observational sense.
We did it! Thanks, Tom — this was fun.
Absolutely, thanks so much for playing along, Sarah!